They had crossed the Siwaliks and the half-tropical Doon, left
Mussoorie behind them, and headed north along the narrow hill-roads.
Day after day they struck deeper into the huddled mountains, and day
after day Kim watched the lama return to a man’s strength. Among the
terraces of the Doon he had leaned on the boy’s shoulder, ready to
profit by wayside halts. Under the great ramp to Mussoorie he drew
himself together as an old hunter faces a well-remembered bank, and
where he should have sunk exhausted swung his long draperies about him,
drew a deep double-lungful of the diamond air, and walked as only a
hillman can. Kim, plains-bred and plains-fed, sweated and panted
astonished. “This is _my_ country,” said the lama. “Beside Such-zen,
this is flatter than a rice-field”; and with steady, driving strokes
from the loins he strode upwards. But it was on the steep downhill
marches, three thousand feet in three hours, that he went utterly away
from Kim, whose back ached with holding back, and whose big toe was
nigh cut off by his grass sandal-string. Through the speckled shadow of
the great deodar-forests; through oak feathered and plumed with ferns;
birch, ilex, rhododendron, and pine, out on to the bare hillsides’
slippery sunburnt grass, and back into the woodlands’ coolth again,
till oak gave way to bamboo and palm of the valley, the lama swung
untiring.
